# Replication data for: Citizen science informs demand-driven breeding of opportunity crops 

> Rachel C. Voss, Kauê de Sousa, Sognigbé N'Danikou, Abdul Shango, Lys Amavi Aglinglo, Marie-Angélique Laporte, Eric C. Legba, Aristide Carlos Houdegbe, Danfing dit Youssouf Diarra, Aminata Dolo, Amadou Sidibe, Colette Ouidyam Ouedraogo, Harouna Coulibaly, Enoch G. Achigan-Dako, Aishi Kileo, Dickson Malulu, Zamira Matumbo, Fekadu Dinssa, Joost van Heerwaarden, Jacob van Etten, Amritbir Riar, Maarten van Zonneveld

## Summary
RATIONALE: Opportunity crops, also known as neglected and underutilized species (NUS), offer benefits to diversify food systems with nutritious and climate-resilient foods. A major limitation to incorporate these crops in farming systems is the lack of improved varieties, which impedes farmers from accessing quality planting materials of these crops. The study explored how citizen science methods can support demand-driven breeding and seed production of NUS using leafy amaranth – a nutritious and hardy vegetable - as a case study. The study identified farmer preferences and market segments, with particular attention to gender and social differentiation. 
METHODS: We used the tricot approach to conduct participatory on-farm trials of 14 varieties with 2,063 farmers from Benin, Mali, and Tanzania. We then analyzed farmer trait and varietal preferences in aggregate and among segments of farmers, using cluster analysis. 
RESULTS: Farmers’ overall preferences for amaranth varieties was driven principally by plant survival, yield, leaf size, taste, and marketability. Distinct farmer segments (older women generalists, young women specialists, older men generalists, and young men specialists) preferred different varieties depending on gender, and business-orientation.
CONCLUSION: The identified farmer segments, along with their unique variety preferences, provide valuable information for breeders and seed enterprises, and support demand-driven amaranth breeding and seed system development. The methods used and lessons learned from our citizen science exercise can be applied to enhance breeding and seed supply of other opportunity crops that are underutilized in Africa and elsewhere. 

## Keywords 
African traditional vegetables, amaranth, data-driven agriculture, market segmentation, neglected and underutilized crops, socioeconomic heterogeneity, tricot approach
